---
title: 'Thinking about Open GIS.'
date: 2019-03-04 00:00:00
description: Something something something
featured_image: '/images/spatial-thinking/cover.png'
---
## Historical Introduction to GIS
A Geographic Information System (GIS) is any system designed to extract information from spatial data.  GIS are often computer systems but this isn't always the case.  The first documented application of GIS occurred in 1832 when Charles Picquet, a French geographer, mapped the number of cholera-related deaths per district in Paris.  No computers were used but Charles was still able to map the epidemiology of cholera using the spatial data he collected!  It's cool that we can do this type of manual spatial analysis but its not all that efficient, accurate, precise, or repeatable.  The technology boom created through the nuclear arms programs of the 40s and 50s generated a variety of hardware and mapping applications which resulted in the creation of the first operational "modern" GIS by the early 1960s.  The computer system stored and analyzed spatial data for the Canada Land Inventory, a mapping project with the goal of optimizing the country's land usage by determining the suitability of land for various purposes (agriculture, forestry, recreation etc.).  Technical advances in GIS continued through the 1980s but usage was mostly restricted to government projects and academia.  

It wasn't until the 1990s that GIS software worked well enough to become an acceptable commercial solution.  This period of time saw a huge push to commercialize spatial analysis through the advent of the "Desktop GIS" which promised to bring the power of spatial analysis to end-users through intuitive and simple user interfaces.  Many of the technologies widely used throughout today's industry found their start during this period (ERDAS Imagine in 1982, ArcInfo in 1982, and ENVI in 1995).  The explosion of the Desktop GIS was critical to the formation of the geospatial industry as it lowered the barrier to entry for spatial analysis.  For the first time in human history it was possible to analyze large amounts of spatial data without requiring an education in the spatial or computing sciences!  

Although it turned into a huge success, the commercialization of Desktop GIS had quite the rocky start.  For years, GIS was a technology largely reserved for very specific government or academic applications.  Spatial data, historically limited to classified applications, was also becoming publicly available for the first time.  The underlying technology was so new and unfamiliar to the general public that the majority of would-be early adopters were hesitant to fully invest.  There was a general notion that GIS could add commercial value but GIS users were unsure exactly how to accomplish this for several reasons.  As such, many of the early GIS companies spent a lot of time and money promoting spatial education and working with early adopters to understand how a GIS can be designed to maximize its effectiveness to the commercial world.  ESRI was particularly good at this and continues to be one of the global leaders in spatial literacy and education, an investment which is largely responsible for their continuing high market share.  

Although most commercial GISystems failed, those that survived are phenomenal examples of how to build a succesful GIS.  ArcGIS, for example, is the culmination of over 35 years of development.  Although the software has changed drastically since its meager beginnings as ArcInfo it is still built on the same core dependencies.  


The software has changed drastically since its meager beginnings as ArcInfo





The early competitive landscape of Desktop GIS was fundamental to understanding how to build ane ffective GIS.  As companies like ESRI did more and more marekt research, th

The early competitive landscape of Desktop GIS was fundamental to understanding how to build an effective GIS.  As companies like ESRI did more and more market research, they got pretty good at understanding customer requirements and built more sophisticated GISystems targeting larger and larger audiences.  Fast-forward to today and there are hundreds of GISystems, both commercially and openly available, designed for hundreds of different applications.


The early competitive landscape of Desktop GIS was fundamental to understanding how to build an effective GIS.  



The early competitive landscape of Desktop GIS was fundamental to understanding how to build an effective GIS.  As companies like ESRI did more and more market research they got pretty good at understanding customer requirements and built more sophisticated GISystems targeting larger and larger audiences.  Fast-forward to today and there are hundreds of GISystems designed for hundreds of different applications.  Although modern GISystems aren't always implemented as desktop solutions






The early competitive landscape of Desktop GIS was fundamental to understanding how to build an effective GIS.  As companies like ESRI did more and more market research they got pretty good at understanding customer requirements and built more sophisticated GISystems targeting larger and larger audiences.  Fast-forward to today and there are hundreds of GISystems designed for hundreds of different applications.  Although the diversity of GISystems has increased over the years, successful GISystems almost always contain a few ciritcal components.





## Whats in a GIS?
As a GIScientist, I am very much interested in the science underlying GISystems.    


Whats in a GIS:
- Hardware
- Software
  - ingest
  - catalog
  - database
  - analysis
  - visualization
- Data
  - raster
  - vector
- Users



ERDAS Imagine - 1982
ENVI - 1995
ArcGIS -
