---
title: 'Thinking about Open GIS'
date: 2019-03-04 00:00:00
description: Something something something
featured_image: '/images/spatial-thinking/cover.png'
---
## Historical Introduction to GIS
A Geographic Information System (GIS) is any system designed to extract information from spatial data.  GIS are often computer systems but this isn't always the case.  The first documented application of GIS occurred in 1832 when Charles Picquet, a French geographer, mapped the number of cholera-related deaths per district in Paris.  No computers were used but Charles was still able to map the epidemiology of cholera using the spatial data he collected!  It's cool that we can do this type of manual spatial analysis but its not all that efficient, accurate, precise, or repeatable.  The technology boom created through the nuclear arms programs of the 40s and 50s generated a variety of hardware and mapping applications which resulted in the creation of the first operational "modern" GIS by the early 1960s.  The computer system stored and analyzed spatial data for the Canada Land Inventory, a mapping project with the goal of optimizing the country's land usage by determining the suitability of land for various purposes (agriculture, forestry, recreation etc.).  Technical advances in GIS continued through the 1980s but usage was mostly restricted to government projects and academia.  

It wasn't until the 1990s that GIS software worked well enough to become an acceptable commercial solution.  This period of time saw a huge push to commercialize spatial analysis through the advent of the "Desktop GIS" which promised to bring the power of spatial analysis to end-users through intuitive and simple user interfaces.  Many of the technologies widely used throughout today's industry found their start during this period (ERDAS Imagine in 1982, ArcInfo in 1982, and ENVI in 1995).  The explosion of the Desktop GIS was critical to the formation of the geospatial industry as it lowered the barrier to entry for spatial analysis.  For the first time in human history it was possible to analyze large amounts of spatial data without requiring an education in the spatial or computing sciences!  

Although it turned into a huge success, the commercialization of Desktop GIS had quite the rocky start.  For years, GIS was a technology largely reserved for very specific government or academic applications.  Spatial data, historically limited to classified applications, was also becoming widely publicly available for the first time.  The underlying technology was so new and unfamiliar that the majority of would-be early adopters were hesitant to fully invest.  There was a general notion that GIS could add commercial value but GIS users were unsure exactly how to accomplish this.  As such, many of the early GIS companies spent a lot of time and money promoting spatial education and working with early adopters to understand how to design a GIS.  ESRI was particularly good at this and continues to be one of the global leaders in spatial literacy and education, an investment which is largely responsible for their continuing high market share.

The GISystems which survived the competitive landscape are proven examples of how to build a successful GIS.  ArcGIS, for example, is the culmination of over 35 years of product development in a fiercely competitive and rapidly changing environment.  Although the design of GISystems has changed drastically with the introduction of new technologies like the cloud, newer systems are still fundamentally built on the same components.

## Whats in a GIS?

There are five universally agreed upon components of a GIS: hardware, software, data, methods, and people.

| Component | Description |
| ---------------|----------------|
| Hardware | The compute resources used by the GIS. |
| Software | Functions used to analyze, visualize, and transform spatial data. |
| Data | Functions used to ingest, store, and export spatial data. |
| Methods | The business rules/operating practices of the GIS. |
| People | The people who interact with the GIS, whether it is analyst, programmer, administrator, or general user. |

#### Hardware

Desktop systems rely on the hardware of the host computer while cloud-based systems typically provision hardware through a cloud-provider such as AWS.  Cloud-providers open up a lot of options for GIS hardware.  Desktop systems are limited by the host while cloud based systems can easily and cost-effectively scale up or down by increasing or decreasing the available resources.  Cloud-applications are accessed through the web which makes them much more accessible than desktop systems which require a full, local installation on the specific device.  

#### Software

- data transformation
- database management system
- spatial analysis
- image processing
- visualization
- gui

#### Data

- data ingest
- catalog
- data export

#### People


## Open Cloud GIS Stack

Hardware:
- AWS

Software:
- data transformation: gdal/shapely/rasterio/pyproj/otb
- database management: rds post-gis, dynamodb s2, really any spatial database works here
- spatial analysis: gdal/shapely/rasterio/geopandas/otb
- image processing: numpy/opencv/ai/machinelearning
- visualization: COG, web-tiled COG, marblecutter
- gui: react/angular, cesium.js, leaflet.

Data:
- data ingest: STAC
- catalog: STAC
- data export: GDAL








## Notes

Requirements for open, accessible, GIS:
- modular components
- cheap
-
